Ilans final edits (#68)
popsim-consortium/adding-species-manuscript: adding_species_manuscript.tex

but producing simulations that recapitulate even the main features of genomic datasets remains a major obstacle.
Today, more realistic simulations are possible thanks to large increases in
the quantity of available data
and the sophistication of inference and simulation software.
However, implementing these simulations can require substantial time and specialized knowledge.
These challenges are especially pronounced for simulating less well-studied species,
since it is not always clear what level of realism is sufficient
to confidently answer a given question, or what information is required
to produce simulations of that desired realism.
\Stdpopsim is a community-developed framework that seeks to lower this barrier
by making it easy to simulate complex population genetic models using
up-to-date information.

> The initial version of \stdpopsim, the species catalog contained information for 

Reviewer: Missing an "In" at the start of this sentence? The current version makes it sound like stdpopsim is just the catalog.

Author: Yes, that's a typo. I'll also try to reword that part of the abstract to better convey that the catalog is only one aspect of stdpopsim

but producing simulations that recapitulate even the main features of genomic datasets remains a major obstacle.
Today, more realistic simulations are possible thanks to large increases in
the quantity of available data
and the sophistication of inference and simulation software.
However, implementing these simulations still requires substantial time and specialized knowledge.
These challenges are especially pronounced for simulating less well-studied species,
since it is not always clear what level of realism is sufficient
to confidently answer a given question, or what information is required
to produce simulations of that desired realism.
\Stdpopsim is a community-developed framework that seeks to lower this barrier
by making it easy to simulate complex population genetic models using
up-to-date information.
The initial version of \stdpopsim focused on establishing this framework using 
six well-characterized model species.

> Here, we report on updates made in the new release of \stdpopsim (version 0.2),

Reviewer 2: call them "major updates"?

> which include substantial additions to simulation capabilities and a significant expansion of the species catalog.

Reviewer 2: I suggest reordering, so "adding species" comes first, and more directly link why the simulation additions are important for adding species: eg. "which includes a significant expansion of the species catalog and substantial additions to simulation capabilities that make it possible to simulate a broader range of species."

%Ilan: moved this up here, to leave the end of the abstract to the bigger ideas
Features added to improve the realism of the simulated genomes include non-crossover recombination and provision of species-specific genomic annotations.
Expansion of the species catalog involved community-driven efforts to increase coverage more broadly across the tree of life

> to 21 species, with 25 demographic models and 37 genetic maps.

Reviewer 2: Do we need the specific numbers here? We have the details later, and I think the numbers throw off the flow here. If we want some idea of magnitude, perhaps "Through community-driven efforts, we expanded the number of species in the catalog by three-fold, which broadened species coverage across the tree of life." (Could add "..., and increased the representation of species with specific demographic models and genetic maps." but that's getting back toward throwing off the flow.)

Author: I agree. It's better to focus on the main accomplishments here. I changed to:
> Through community-driven efforts, we expanded the number of species in the catalog by more than three-fold and broadened coverage across the tree of life.

> Our experience throughout this process was that people are indeed keen to put in the time and effort to include their study species,

Reviewer 2: rm "indeed"

but that simple, clear guidance is vital.

> Our intention with this paper is in part to provide another learning

Reviewer 2: For some reason I think "in part" doesn't work right here, perhaps "Consequently, our intention with this paper is also to provide another learning modality to meet that need, ..."?

Author: I also removed "another", since it's not clear what other learning modalities we're referring to. It also kind-of clashes with "also".
> Consequently, our intention with this paper is also to provide a learning modality to meet that need, ...

The initial release of \stdpopsim was
restricted to only six well-characterized model species, such as
\emph{Drosophila melanogaster} and \emph{Homo sapiens},

> but feedback we received from the community identified a widespread desire

Reviewer 2: "feedback we received from the community identified" -> "community feedback displayed"

Author: I think it's actually better to emphasized that we received feedback, so the long form seems better to me here

to simulate a wider range of non-model species,
and ideally to incorporate these into the \stdpopsim catalog for future use.
This feedback, and subsequent efforts to expand the catalog, 

> also uncovered the need for a better understanding of when it is practical to create a realistic

Reviewer 2: I'm tempted to suggest "vital need" since this was apparently a Big Deal that we didn't originally realize was a Big Deal, but I can hear my high school English teacher tutting and citing Hemingway at me.

Author: changing this to "uncovered a vital need"

simulation of a species of interest, and indeed what ``realistic'' means in this context.
%Ilan: this is better covered in the next para
%In addition to \stdpopsim's framework for standardizing simulations of some species,
%our experience has led us to develop guidelines that may be of use to
%the broader population genetics community.

This paper reports on the updates made in the current release of \stdpopsim  (version 0.2),
and is also intended as a resource for any researcher
who wishes to develop whole-genome simulations for their own species of interest.
%and maybe add them to the \stdpopsim catalog.
%Ilan: I added a more comprehensive walkthrough the different sections
We start by describing the main idea behind the standardized simulation framework
of \stdpopsim,

> and then outline the main updates made to the \stdpopsim catalog and simulation framework

Reviewer 2: add "that have made the broad expansion of the species catalog possible" or similar? since it seems mostly agreed that the new things we discuss are those relevant to the catalog.

Author: This sentence is already quite long. We make this point in several places (the abstract and in the "updates" section), so I think we can stick with a brief statement here as is.

in the past two years.

> We then devote a major section of the paper to provide guidelines for

Reviewer 2: rm "devote a major section of the paper to "

> generating population genomic simulations, either for the purpose of using them in one specific study,

Reviewer 2: "generating population genomic simulations of a specific species, either for the purpose of using them in one or more specific studies,"

Author: I agree that your version is more accurate, but this is already a long statement, and I'd rather not add more here, unless it's necessary. I was trying to highlight two extremes of the spectrum: a one-off simulation, and a standardized stdpopsim simulation. Clearly, there is a scpectrum here, but the main point is made IMO by highlighting just the two extremes.

> or with the intent of adding these simulations to \stdpopsim.

Reviewer 2: "or with the intent of making this species model available for future work by adding it to \stdpopsim."

If you don't want to go with that, I'd sub "these simulations" with "this species model" since it's not the simulations themselves that are added

Author: I agree with your point. I went with this change:
> or with the intent of making the simulations available for future work by adding the appropriate models to \stdpopsim.

> Among other things, we discuss when a whole-genome simulation is more useful than

Reviewer 2: "things" -> "considerations" ?

simulations based on either individual loci or generic (non-species specific) loci.
We specify the required input data,
% (genome assembly, mutation and recombination rates, and demographic model),
mention common pitfalls in choosing appropriate parameters,

> and suggested courses of action for species that are missing estimates of some necessary inputs.

Reviewer 2: "suggested" -> "suggest"

> We conclude with examples from a couple of species recently added to \stdpopsim,

Reviewer 2: "a couple of" -> "two"

which demonstrate some of the main considerations involved in the process of designing realistic whole-genome simulations.
While the guidelines provided in this paper are intended for any researcher interested in implementing a population genomic simulation using any software,

> we do highlight the ways in which the framework set up by \stdpopsim eases the burden involved in this process.

Reviewer 2: "we do highlight" -> "we highlight"

Reviewer 2: "the framework set up by \stdpopsim" -> "the \stdpopsim framework"

Reviewer 2: "... eases the burden involved in this process and facilitates reproducible research."

into a population genomic simulation often involves 
integrating this data between different literature sources, which can
require specialized knowledge of population genetics theory.
%Ilan: shortened the end here to better tie this to next para
Thus, the process of coding a realistic simulation can be quite time consuming and often error-prone.

%As a result, while the simulations themselves may require considerable computational resources,
%the most time-consuming and error-prone part of population genomic simulation is
%often the task of correctly parameterizing simulation software.

The main objective of \stdpopsim is to streamline this process,
and to make it more robust and more reproducible.
Contributors collect parameter values for their species of interest from the literature,
and then specify these parameters in a template file for the new model.

> %Ilan: I added some of the details commented out by Elise but streamlined it in one sentence

Reviewer 2: LGTM

This model then goes through a vital peer-review process,

> which involves recreating the model based on the provided documentation,

Reviewer 2: "which involves another researcher independently recreating..."

I think it should be made clear that it's not just making sure the code runs, but actually another human going through the same thought process.

Author: very good point

 (see \cite{schrider2020background} for a notable exception).
%
Second, modeling physical linkage allows simulations to capture
important correlations between genetic variants along the same chromosomes.
These correlations reduce variance relative to independent simulations of equivalent genetic material.
This has a particularly striking effect in long stretches of low recombination rates,
as observed for instance on the long arm of human chromosome 22 \citep{Dawson2002}.
In bacteria, a similar effect occurs due to genome-wide linkage that is broken only
by recombination of short segments \citep{Didelot2010}.
When conducting simulations with natural selection, linkage has
an even stronger effect. Selection acting on a small number of sites can
indirectly influence levels and patterns of genetic variation at linked neutral sites,
which has been shown to have a widespread
effect on patterns of genome variation in myriad species
\citep[e.g.,][]{McVicker2009,Charlesworth2012}. 
In addition, the lengths of chromosome-scale shared haplotypes within and
between populations provides valuable information on their demographic history.
Demography inference methods that use such information,

> such as MSMC \citep{Schiffels2020}, or IBDNe \citep{browning2015accurate},

Reviewer 2: "or IBDNe" -> "and IBDNe"

%, or the method of \citet{ringbauer2018estimating},
perform best on long genomic segments with realistic recombination rates.

> Chromosome-scale simulations are clearly required to test (or, train) such methods,

Reviewer 2: "(or, train)" -> "(or train)"

> or to conduct power analyses for design of empirical studies that use them.

Reviewer 2: "for design of" -> "to design"

Author: missed that one. Will change to 
> . . . to conduct power analyses when designing empirical studies that use them.

\section*{Additions to \stdpopsim}
    \label{sec:expanded-catalog}

% Ilan: I think this brief summary is a bit redundant. Better to jump right into the "results"
% Since its initial publication in \cite{Adrion2020},
% we have increased the number of species in the catalog nearly fourfold,
% added multiple demographic models and genetic maps, and
% improved the simulation framework of \stdpopsim in several ways.

When first published, the \stdpopsim catalog included six species:
\emph{Homo sapiens}, \emph{Pongo abelii}, \emph{Canis familiaris}, \emph{Drosophila melanogaster},
\emph{Arabidopsis thaliana}, and \emph{Escherichia coli} (Figure \ref{fig:tree}).
One way the catalog has expanded is through introduction of additional demographic models
for \emph{Homo sapiens}, \emph{Pongo abelii}, \emph{Drosophila melanogaster},
and \emph{Arabidopsis thaliana}, enabling a wider variety of simulations for these

> thoroughly studied species.

Reviewer 2: "thoroughly" -> "well"

%the most time-consuming and error-prone part of population genomic simulation is
%often the task of correctly parameterizing simulation software.

The main objective of \stdpopsim is to streamline this process,
and to make it more robust and more reproducible.
Contributors collect parameter values for their species of interest from the literature,
and then specify these parameters in a template file for the new model.
%Ilan: I added some of the details commented out by Elise but streamlined it in one sentence
This model then goes through a vital peer-review process,
which involves recreating the model based on the provided documentation,
and executing automated scripts to compare the two models.
If discrepancies are found in this process, they are resolved by discussion between the contributor and reviewer,
and if necessary with input of additional members of the community.
This quality control process quite often finds subtle bugs \citep[e.g., as in][]{Ragsdale2020}
or highlights parts of the model that are ambiguously defined by the literature sources.
Importantly, this increases the reliability of the resulting simulations in any downstream analysis.

> Another central goal of \stdpopsim is to promote whole-genome simulations,

Reviewer: s/central/important ?

Author: I think i wanted to avoid important because it was used in the previous sentence. Will think of a way to bypass this.

Reviewer 2: To be honest, I'm not a fan of "importantly" as a modifier in general, but that feels like nitpicking. ;-) We could just remove it, ie. "This increases the reliability..." and use "important" in place of "central" in the next sentence.

Reviewer: I like Elise's idea

Author: This paragraph has two other 'important's in it. I'll use my thesaurus to replace one of them ;-)

two bacteria,
%in addition to
four primates and a common mammalian associate of primates (\textit{Canis familiaris}).
% Elise: An aside, I find this way of describing dogs to be hilariously academic
% Ilan: I concur :-)
Not all of these have genetic maps or demographic models (see Figure \ref{fig:tree}),
but this lays the framework for future contributions.
\begin{figure}
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{figs/species_fig}
	\caption{Phylogenetic tree of species available in the \stdpopsim catalog,
		including the six species we published in the original release \citep[in blue]{Adrion2020}, and 15 species that have since been added (in orange).
		Solid circles indicate species that have one (light grey) or more
		(dark grey) demographic models and genetic maps.
		Branch length were derived from the divergence times provided by TimeTree5 \citep{Kumar2022}.
	\label{fig:tree} }
\end{figure}

Expanding the species catalog required adding several functionalities to the simulation framework of \stdpopsim.
Some features were added by upgrading the neutral simulation engine, \texttt{msprime}, from version 0.7.4 to version 1.0. \citep{Baumdicker2022}.

> Among other things, this upgrade includes a discrete site model of mutation,

Reviewer 2: "things" -> "benefits" or "features"

which enables simulating sites with multiple mutations and possibly more than two alleles.

> Another key functionality added to the simulation framework of \stdpopsim was modeling of non-crossover recombination.

Reviewer 2: "the simulation framework of \stdpopsim" -> "\stdpopsim's simulation framework"

Reviewer 2: "modeling of non-crossover recombination" -> "modeling non-crossover recombination" or "the ability to model non-crossover recombination"

% Ilan: I concur :-)
Not all of these have genetic maps or demographic models (see Figure \ref{fig:tree}),
but this lays the framework for future contributions.
\begin{figure}
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{figs/species_fig}
	\caption{Phylogenetic tree of species available in the \stdpopsim catalog,
		including the six species we published in the original release \citep[in blue]{Adrion2020}, and 15 species that have since been added (in orange).
		Solid circles indicate species that have one (light grey) or more
		(dark grey) demographic models and genetic maps.
	\label{fig:tree} }
\end{figure}

Expanding the species catalog required adding several functionalities to the simulation framework.
We thus upgraded the neutral simulation engine, \texttt{msprime}, from version 0.7.4 to version 1.0. \citep{Baumdicker2022}.
This upgrade provides a number of benefits such as a discrete site model of mutation,
so that simulated data will now %, as in real data,
have a small proportion of sites with multiple mutations and possibly more than two alleles.
Another key feature enabled by this upgrade was recombination by gene conversion,

> which is essential for modeling genomes of bacteria and archea.

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that what bacteria do acts like gene conversion (and so is implemented using the "gene conversion" widgets of the simulators) but is called something different (e.g. "horizontal transfer"), so this ought to be readjusted a bit?

Author: I'm editing this now. My plan is to start by discussing "non-crossover recombination" without leaning on any specific terminology (such as GC or HGT). I'm adding citation to several studies on recombination in bacteria and archea

Gene conversion affects shorter segments than crossover recombination and creates distinct patterns of genetic diversity along the genome~\citep{Korunes2017}.
In bacteria and archaea, homologous recombination occurs primarily through gene conversion rather than single crossover recombinations.
As a result, such species cannot be realistically simulated with a recombination model that considers only crossovers.
Gene conversion in such species is implemented in \stdpopsim by setting the
\texttt{bacterial\_recombination} flag to \texttt{True} (as a feature of the genome)

> and the  \texttt{gene\_conversion\_length} parameter to the average gene conversion tract length.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need to put in the actual API options?

Reviewer 3: Hm, also - the gene conversion option works in SLiM now also (where the tract length is not geometric but negative binomial), but this paragraph is headed by 'msprime'.

Reviewer 3: so - I think GC should be a new paragraph

Author: I'll remove the mention of specific flags and parameter names, but will probably still say that there is a flag that tells the engine to use a model of non-crossover recombination. I'm also differentiating this discussion from the upgrade of msprime to v1.0 (but keeping it in the same paragraph ) and explicitly mentioning SLiM to clarify that the same model can be simulated with both engines

This will result in all recombinations being simulated via gene conversion
(no crossover recombinations), where the tract length is sampled from a geometric
distribution whose mean is the specified length.

> For example, the model for \textit{Escherichia coli} has been updated in the \stdpopsim catalog to have a gene conversion rate of $8.9\times 10^{-11}$ with an average tract length of 345 bases \citep{Wielgoss2011,Didelot2012}.

Reviewer 3: actually it has a *recombination rate* of this, but the "bacterial recombination" flag is on, which means that "recombination" is interpreted as gene conversion

Author: This is what I meant, but I'll use the correct terminoligy

%
Some species undergo recombination by gene conversion as well as crossover recombination.
To accommodate this in \stdpopsim simulations,
one needs to set two additional parameters in each chromosome: \texttt{gene\_conversion\_fraction},
which specifies the fraction of recombinations that occur due to gene conversion;
and \texttt{gene\_conversion\_length}, which is the average tract length, as defined above. For example, the model for \emph{Drosophila melanogaster} has been updated in the \stdpopsim catalog to have a fraction of gene conversions of 0.83 (in all chromosomes with recombination) and an average tract length of 518 bases \citep{Comeron2012}.
% ILAN; I think that the part below is no longer needed. Please check.
%
% We note, however, that in eukaryotes, the gene conversion rate might be considerably higher than the rate of single crossover recombination.
%As a result, simulations of eukaryote genomes with gene conversion will typically incur a significant computational load.
%Therefore, in \stdpopsim, users are required to explicitly enable gene conversion
%by  using the use\_species\_gene\_conversion flag.
% Elise: Not sure the blow fits in the GC paragraph?

> % Ilan: the idea is that the model of GC is enabled due to the upgrade to msprime 1.0. I made sure to mention this above. This is still a bit tacked-on here, but still probably the best place to mention this.

Reviewer 3: I think we should mention here that GC is *not* on by default because it makes things significantly slower/bigger,.

Author: Done

The concentrated effort to add species to the \stdpopsim catalog
has lead to a series of important insights about this process,
which we summarize here as a set of guidelines
for implementing realistic simulations for any species.
Our intention is to provide general guidance that applies to any population genomic simulation software,
but we also mention specific requirements that apply to simulations done in the framework of \stdpopsim.
%Ilan: I removed the last bit here and merged some of the points in the intro sentences of the following section

\subsection*{Basic setup for chromosome-level simulations}

Implementing a realistic population genomic simulation for a species of interest

> requires a fairly detailed description of the organism's demography and mechanisms of genetic inheritance.

Reviewer 2: rm "fairly"

  \citep{Chakraborty2016} are likely to boost these initiatives. 
  When expanding the \stdpopsim catalog, we decided to focus on species with near-complete 
  chromosome-level genome assemblies (i.e., close to one contig per chromosome).
  This restriction was set mainly because species with less complete genome builds 

>   typically do not have good estimates of recombination rate or genetic maps, 

Reviewer 2: "or" -> "nor"

  However, we anticipate future development will provide support for more complex, heterogeneous mutational processes,
  as these are easily specified in both the \texttt{SLiM} and \texttt{msprime} simulation engines.
  Such progress will further improve the realism of simulated genomes,
  since mutation rates and processes are known to vary along the genome and through time \citep{Benzer1961,Ellegren2003,Supek2019}.

\item
  \textbf{Recombination rates} (per generation per bp).
  Ideally, a population genomic simulation should make use of a chromosome-level \textbf{recombination map}, 
  since the recombination rate is known to vary widely across chromosomes \citep{Nachman2002},
  and this can strongly affect the patterns of linkage disequilibrium and shared haplotype lengths.
  When this information is not available, we suggest specifying an average recombination rate for each chromosome.
  At minimum, an average genome-wide recombination rate needs to be specified, which is typically available for well assembled genomes.
  %ILAN: added this part about non-CO rec in bacteria

>   Recall that for bacteria and archea, which primarily experience non-crossover recombination,

Reviewer 2: rm "Recall that"

\item
  \textbf{Recombination rates} (per generation per bp).
  Ideally, a population genomic simulation should make use of a chromosome-level \textbf{recombination map}, 
  since the recombination rate is known to vary widely across chromosomes \citep{Nachman2002},
  and this can strongly affect the patterns of linkage disequilibrium and shared haplotype lengths.
  When this information is not available, we suggest specifying an average recombination rate for each chromosome.
  At minimum, an average genome-wide recombination rate needs to be specified, which is typically available for well assembled genomes.
  %ILAN: added this part about GC
  Recall that for bacteria and archea, which primarily experience recombination by gene conversion,
  the recombination rate corresponds to the rate of gene conversion,
  and the average tract length should also be specified
  (see details in previous section).
  If one wishes to model gene conversion together with crossover recombination,
  then they should specify the fraction of recombinations done by gene conversion

>   as well as the average tract length (per chromosome).

Reviewer 3: People can still add GC rates themselves to contigs for which we haven't specified GC rates, but this is no longer part of the standard API - perhaps this should say instead just something saying that GC is available but optional.

Author: I didn't get your point here. I want to stick to the framework as we describe it in the gene conversion paragraph. One may model GC by specifying for each chrom a % of recs done by GC + an average tract length. Do we want to say anything more here?

Reviewer 4: I think adding a subsection for gc in eukaryotes might be a good way to disentangle it here.

E.g. starting from Line 553:

\textbf{gene conversion (optional)}
If one wishes to model gene conversion in eukaryotes either together with crossover recombination or as a stand-alone process,
  then they should specify the fraction of recombinations done by gene conversion
  as well as the average tract length (per chromosome).

%
Finally, each species requires validation of its code before it is added to the \stdpopsim catalog,
as well as long-term maintenance to keep it up-to-date with changes made to the \stdpopsim framework.
So, the benefit of including species with very partial genome builds in \stdpopsim
would be outweighed by the substantial extra burden on \stdpopsim maintainers as well as
downstream users of these models.

%Ilan: applied some important edits in this paragraph to better address some of the delicate situations and options we suggest for them 
That being said, simulation is still potentially useful for species with partial genome builds.
Longer contigs or scaffolds in these builds can be simulated separately and independently.
%
This approach allows us to model genetic linkage within each contig,
but linkage between different contigs that map to the same chromosome will not be captured by the simulation.
This provides a reasonable approximation for many purposes, at least for genomic regions far from the contig edges.
%
For shorter contigs, separate independent simulations will not be able to capture patterns of long-range linkage in a reasonably realistic way.
%

> Thus, a viable option for shorter contigs is to lump them together into longer pseudo-chromosomes, trying to mimic the species' expected chromosome lengths.

Reviewer 2: "potentially viable"? since it depends on the question

%
Despite their somewhat artificial construction,
these pseudo-chromosomes have the important benefit of
capturing patterns of linkage similar to those observed in real genomic chromosomes.
%Ilan: tried to give a few concrete examples here

> If, for example, the main purpose of the simulation is to examine the distribution of lengths of shared haplotypes between individuals,

Reviewer 2: is "between individuals" redundant here?

Author: I don't see the harm in keeping it

or study patterns of background selection,
then it makes sense to simulate such pseudo chromosomes.

> Note, however, that specific genetic correlations between different contigs lumped together will potentially be highly inaccurate.

Reviewer 2: "will potentially be" -> "can be"

> So, if the main purpose of the simulation is to examine local patterns of genetic variation in certain loci of interest, then it might make more sense to simulate the relevant contigs separately (even if they are short), or to randomly sample several mappings of contigs to pseudo-chromosomes.

Reviewer 2: rm "So"
rm "certain"

Reviewer 2: "might make more sense" -> "would be more appropriate"

Author: followed these suggestions, but kept the "so" (I like connecting this to the previous point directly)

%

> Ultimately, the recommended mode of simulation for species with partial genome builds depends on the intended use of the simulated genomes.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be the last sentence of the paragraph/section since it's the real take-home message

		\label{fig:anogam} }
\end{figure}

\emph{Anopheles gambiae}, the African malaria mosquito, is 
a non-model organism whose population history has direct implications for human health.
Several large-scale studies in recent years have provided information about the
population history of this species on which population genomic simulations can be based \citep[e.g.,][]{Miles2017, clarkson2020genome}.
The genome assembly structure used in the species model is based 
on the AgamP4 \textbf{genome assembly} \citep{Sharakhova2007}, which 
was downloaded from Ensembl \citep{ensembl2021} via \stdpopsim's
utilities that interact with Ensembl. These utilities
make it easy to accurately retrieve basic genome information and construct the appropriate Python data structures.

%Ilan: I moved this up here because this was the most straightforward step
% I saw in the qc pr that there was some discussion about recombination rates
% for the x chrom. Anything worth reporting? Maybe the pending estimates from 

> % the paper from Omar's group?

Reviewer 2: I think this (recomb. rate on X) is what I was thinking about too. (For instance the resolution about using a recombination calculated at the middle of X vs calculated using 90% of X: https://github.com/popsim-consortium/stdpopsim/pull/906#issuecomment-1136160294)

Reviewer 2: Which leads me to a further thought - in the paper these are given as cM/Mb, should we point out that there can be necessary conversion calculations when papers use different units? (Because this is a place things could go wrong.)

Author: I looked at the discussion again, but couldn't summarize it in a way which will highlight some useful lesson. I'll leave it as is for now, but maybe @petrelharp or @andrewkern will be able to add something here. I left the comment in the LaTex to remind us that this is left open

Estimates of average \textbf{recombination rates} for each of the chromosomes (excluding the mitochondrial genome)
were taken from a recombination map inferred by \citet{Pombi2006} which itself included information from
\citet{zheng1996integrated} (Figure \ref{fig:anogam}A).
As direct estimates of \textbf{mutation rate} (e.g., via mutation accumulation) do not currently exist for \emph{Anopheles gambiae},
we used the genome-wide average mutation rate of $\mu=3.5 \times 10^{-9}$ mutations per generation per site,

> estimated for \textit{D.~melanogaster} by \cite{Keightley2009}

Reviewer 2: "estimated for its relative D. melanogaster" to reinforce the point that they didn't just choose any old estimate

Author: Changed to:
> estimated by Keightley et al. (2009} for the closely related species, _Drosophila melanogaster_,
and ...

		\\
		\hline
		Demographic model &
		Set the effective population size (Ne) to a value
		that reflects the average observed genetic diversity in the
		simulated population
		     &
		Features of genetic diversity that are captured by the site frequency spectrum,
		such as the prevalence of low-frequency alleles\\
		\hline
	\end{tabular}
\end{table}

%ILAN: following suggestions from others, I moved most of this into the table,
% and added a clearer description of the table in the main text.
For many species it is difficult to obtain estimates of all necessary model parameters.
Table \ref{tab:param-mod} provide suggestions for ways to deal with missing values of various central model parameters.
The table also mentions the main discrepancies between the simulated data and real genomic data,
which can be caused by mis-specification of each parameter.

%ILAN: shortened the paragraph by removing a lot of the low-level considerations,
%  following a suggestion by Jerome
Several researchers who participated in the ``Growing the Zoo'' hackathon wished to add species
whose genome assemblies are composed of many relatively small contigs,
unanchored to chromosome-level scaffolds.

> Although we wish to keep \stdpopsim as inclusive as possible,
> we made a conscience decision to only add species with chromosome-level assemblies.

Reviewer 3: It's not so clear what 'inclusive' means here (like, we also aim to be an inclusive community of people working together); how about
```suggestion
Although we had not previously put restrictions on which species might be added,
we decided that we would only add species with chromosome-level assemblies.
```

Author: accepted your suggestion and will include in the next PR

making chromosome-level simulation much less useful in such species.
%
Another issue is the storage burden and long load times involved in dealing with
hundreds of contigs.
%
Finally, each species requires validation of its code before it is added to the \stdpopsim catalog,
as well as long-term maintenance to keep it up-to-date after changes to the \stdpopsim framework.
So, the benefit of including species with very partial genome builds in \stdpopsim
would be outweighed by the substantial extra burden on \stdpopsim maintainers as well as
downstream users of these models.

 
That being said, simulation is still possible and potentially useful for species with partial genome builds.
One way to deal with this situation is to include only the longer contigs or scaffolds,
treating them as separate chromosomes in the simulation.
Some of these contigs will map to the same chromosome, 
so simulating them separately will not capture the genetic linkage between them.
However, this provides a reasonable approximation for many purposes, at least for genomic regions far from the contig edges.

> Short contigs can either be omitted from simulation, or lumped together into one (or several) longer pseudo-chromosome(s).

Reviewer 3: I think the deleted stuff in the rest of this paragraph is useful, and it's part of the point of this paper to explain the underlying tricky issues.

Reviewer 3: The point about "false precision" is that if someone thinks "oh, I'm precisely simulating segment 18374499 to 4885722 of chromsome 18" then they're missing the point that well yes the features on that segment might be 'precise', but the linked effects of other bits of chromosome 18 are missing.

Author: @petrelharp I'm still not quite sure what the point of 'false precision' is. I'm going to try to provide more insight here by presenting the pros and cons of lumping more clearly:

> When lumping short contigs together, one should weigh the benefits of fitting the amount of data of real genomes and capturing the linkage structure within each contig, against the adverse effects of inducing false or inaccurate correlation between variants from different contigs.

(in bold the modified part of the sentence)

Reviewer 3: okay, here's the point: suppose that someone wants to simulate a genome that is just in a lot of contigs; and they put together the code to run neutral simulations of lots of unlinked chunks of exactly the same size as their contigs, so that each bit of real data is carefully matched to a simulated chunk. Although this seems very precise and accurate somehow, there is (almost) no point at all to doing this careful matching up. The advantages to realistic matching up of chromosomes are, I think mostly: (1) realistic recombination maps and (2) realistic varying strengths of selection (with exon density); but you get neither advantage from lots of anonymous unlinked contigs.

This is not a hypothetical situation, and is tricky and something we spent a good deal of time talking about, which is why I'm trying to explain it.

Author: I'm starting to get the point (finally). So, I plan to add a thoughtful discussion about the benefits of lumping contigs into pseudo chromosomes (mentioning the obvious caveats), using the arguments you make in your comments (here and below). You've now got me on board on the position that the benefits outweigh the negative effects :-). If I'm not mistaken, the same points apply here (when we discuss a build that has long and short contigs) and in the case we mention later (with only short contigs). So, I think it makes sense to address this once and not as two separate issues. I will also remove the mention of the option to omit the short contigs. That's always an option I guess, and it distracts from the main point here. Does this plan make sense, @petrelharp ?

Author: BTW, we might not want to make strict distinction between short and long contigs here. Clearly, lumping makes more sense for shorter contigs, but it might make more sense to blur the line here a bit.

%Ilan: I didn't quite get the point about "false precision", so I simplified this statement
Creating pseudo-chromosomes allows the simulation to fit the amount of data of real genomes, but it artificially increases the correlation between variants.
%
Finally, we note that for some situations it may be sufficient to rely on simulation of a large number of unlinked sites \citep{Gutenkunst2009,Excoffier2013},
which can be generated without any sort of genome assembly.

> % Ilan: shortened this last part and removed mention of the option to create anonymous chromosomes. IMO, for many purposes, it's probably better to keep the sites independent rather than create aritificial and erroneous linkage between them.

Reviewer 3: I don't agree. By having a realistic amount of linkage you, for instance, would end up with a realistic amount of background selection acting across the genome (and so a simulation of unlinked loci would end up with too much genetic diversity). The precise landscape of background selection intensity would not be right, but the general statistical properties of it should be right-ish, to the extent that a random stitching together of contigs looks like a real chromosome.

Author: Okay. I'm making some more edits to this paragraph and will try to make this point in the end. My idea is to now describe cases with partial genome builds like this:
1) Treat long contigs as separate chromosomes [ main caveat is that you're missing out on linkage between contigs that map to same chrom ]
2) Lump together shorter contigs or omit them completely [ benefits and caveats to lumping ]
3) If the species 'genome build' only consists of short contigs, you may simulate artificial anonymous chroms. This (again) models linkage within each contigs and (approximately) captures some basic features such as BGS
4) Finally, you have the option of simulating independent sites, that you can do even without any genome build. however, then you miss out on the cool benefits of whole-chrom simulations, which is what we're trying to promote here

Reviewer 3: from slack: maybe we need an example or two in this section; like "if you want to fit the distribution of LD values then it's better to simulate a whole anonymous genome; while if you want to compare the LD values for a specific piece of genome to simulation then it might be better to simulate that specific contig, either unlinked or linked to other random contigs (and take several draws of which random contigs it's linked to)"

which then overrides the species' mutation rate when this demographic model is applied in simulation.
%
The issue of fitting the rates used in simulation with those assumed during inference was discussed during the independent review of this demographic model, and it raised an important question about recombination rates. Since \cite{MacLeod2013} use runs of homozygosity to infer the demographic model, their results depends on the assumed recombination rate. The recombination rate assumed in inference (\(r=10^{-8}\)) is \(8\%\) higher than the one used in the species model (\(r=9.26\times 10^{-9}\)). In its current version, \stdpopsim does not allow specification of a separate recombination rate for each demographic model, so we had no simple way to adjust for this. Future versions of \stdpopsim will enable such flexibility. Thus, we note that genomes simulated under the demographic model as currently implemented in \stdpopsim 
might have slightly higher linkage disequilibrium than observed in real cattle genomes.
However, we anticipate that this would affect patterns less
than selection due to domestication and selective breeding,

> which are as of yet not modeled at all in the simulations of \stdpopsim.

Reviewer 2: "in the simulations of \stdpopsim" -> "in \stdpopsim simulations"

\section*{Conclusion}
    \label{conclusion}

As our ability to sequence genomes continues to advance, the need for
population genomic simulation of new model and non-model organisms is becoming acute.
So too is the concomitant need for an expandable framework for implementing such simulations and guidance for how to do so.
Generating realistic whole-genome simulations presents significant challenges
in coding and the choice of parameter values on which to base the simulation.
\Stdpopsim is a resource that is uniquely poised to address these 
challenges as it provides easy access to state-of-the-art simulation engines and practices and an easy procedure for including new species genomes.
Moreover, the choices of new species to include are driven by the
needs of the population genomics community. In this manuscript we 
describe the expansion of \stdpopsim in two ways:
the addition of new features to the simulation framework that incorporate new evolutionary processes,
such as non-crossover recombination, which broaden the diversity of species that can
be realistically modeled; and the considerable expansion of the catalog itself
to include more species and demographic models. 

> We also compiled a series of guidelines for implementing

Reviewer 2: "compiled" -> "developed" or "formulated"? (Compiled implies they already existed in bits and pieces elsewhere.)

Author: formulated it is

population genomic simulations, which are based on
insights from the community-driven process of expanding the \stdpopsim catalog.
We list the basic requirements for generating a useful chromosome-level simulation for a given species, and explain the rationale behind these requirements.

> We discuss special considerations for collecting relevant information from the literature,

Reviewer 2: This is the third sentence in a row starting "We...". Perhaps "Furthermore, we..."?

Author: I tried to switch it up a bit like this:
> We also formulated a series of guidelines for implementing population genomic simulations, which are based on insights from the community-driven process of expanding the \stdpopsim catalog. **These guidelines specify** the basic requirements for generating a useful chromosome-level simulation for a given species, as well as the rationale behind these requirements. We **also** discuss special considerations for collecting relevant information from the literature, and what to do if some of that information is not available.
